Special guest, and
we'd go down to their apartments for a lunch, and
she'd have a light lunch, very nicely laid out as a
kind of special event. Now, a typical word law
reception for a book signing or anything like that
would include what? Well, it would include a lot of
drinks. Of what sort? Oh, anything you wanted.
Frank's favorites were vodka with bullshot. With
what? Bullshot, the mixer that you put in vodka.
It's kind of a bloody marijuana. It's real spicy.
It's got beef bouillon in it. Bullshot is one word?
I think so. In quotation marks? I don't know. It's a
trademark. Oh, it is a trademark. Okay. And
bourbon he liked. But we would have, Rosemary
would always have food.
What about desserts? What kind of favorite
desserts? You know, Frank had a favorite. I can't
remember now what it was. Don't recall. All right.
Describe the going away events before the ward
laws left. There must have been some.
Yeah.
Well, I don't remember that.
The most memorable party I remember was when
Alfred A. Knopf came to visit. He was a friend of
Frank Wardlaw's from the old days. And we had a
luncheon on the boardroom table in what was then
Frank's office. And we had all of the staff. And a
few family members were there, Rosemary and Ruth
Gromyla, and my wife, and Claire, my daughter. Our
daughter went with us. And our daughter had a place
all to herself. I guess she was four years old at the
time. And they sat her between Mrs. Knopf and
Margaret Ingram. And so she was across the table
from my wife and me. And she just behaved
wonderfully well, was very well behaved. And
everybody commented on what a good girl she was.
And then after the lunch,
Chris and Claire and I drove the Knopf's to the
hotel in Austin. where they were going to spend the
night before heading back to New York. So we got to
ride with them in the car, and I got to ask Alfred
Knopf some questions. Of course, he was pretty
elderly then, and I think he really wasn't paying
too much attention. I think he was dozing most of
the way, but at least we got to say that we rubbed
elbows with the Knopfs. Can we take a break for a
second? I need to... Who were some other famous, in
these A&M years, who were some other famous
celebrities that you encountered?
Well, I don't think that any were that famous to me,
as famous as Knopf. I think
there were lots of Texas people, of course.
Yarborough, for example, used to be at the Texas
State Historical Association meetings. Ralph
Yarborough. Ralph Yarborough, and let me think.
Well, I can't think of anybody specifically, but
some of the lesser lights, I think.
We were heading toward the Ward Law retirement.
Describe the Ward Law retirement. There must have
been all kinds of parties. Describe the Ward Law
retirement parties. or the big event? Well, I
can't. As I said earlier, I don't really remember
that. Well,
I do. Yeah, I do. It was at Three C's Barbecue in
Bryan. I think that was the Wardlaw's retirement.
And had a huge barbecue.
reserved the whole place just for the press's
party. And I saw that it sat across the table from
John Tweetin, I think. And it was an open bar and all
the barbecue you could eat. And it was quite an
affair. Don't remember a lot about it because of
the open bar. Were there some stories told, you
think? Probably. I'm sure there were.
And in terms of the style of leading the press, how
did Lloyd, how did his style differ from Frank's?
Lloyd was, let the staff do, gave the staff a lot
more responsibility than Frank had. Lloyd was
more of a hands-off manager than the
single focal point of the press. And Lloyd
came up with projects and did acquisitions. And
then in many cases, he turned those projects over
to me to carry through on. But he was mostly the idea
man who developed things. Lloyd did some really
great work for the press in fundraising during
those early years. He was the one who got the
funding from the Moody Foundation in Galveston
for faculty and non-faculty publications. We
already had the Moody Natural History Series
established. That was one of the revolving funds
that Frank Wardlaw had set up. But the endowment
for publications by faculty members, A&M
faculty, and a separate endowment for
publications by people other than faculty
members, were both accomplishments of Lloyd's in
the early 80s. They have been tremendous helps to
this press. That kind of endowment is something
every university press should strive to get.
Describe how those endowments work, those
revolving funds. Well, the revolving funds are
different from these endowments. The revolving
fund was set up in a particular subject area, for
example, The Moore Texas Art Series or the Merrick
Natural Environment Series, a certain amount of
money was provided by the donor, and usually we
knew we had books to publish in those particular
subject areas. We knew what we were going to
publish. We'd publish a couple of those books, and
then a portion of the income from the sales of those
books would go back into the series fund. Normally
what? A smaller percentage would go, well, 25%
would go into the overhead account of the press.
But 75% of the sales income then would go back into
the series fund. And so it kept it revolving and
growing. If we made the right selection of books,
those funds would grow over the years.
Of course, and then the Moody, the two Moody
Foundation series, not series, but endowments
were just straightforward gifts of money to the
university press to be used in any way we wanted.
One fund was for publications by faculty members
and the other was for anyone else. And those funds
grow interest and uh... so we have to to be careful
not to spend them down but uh... both of them have
grown over the years and are extremely valuable to
us now to help us publish books that otherwise
would not be financially feasible of the various
series funded by revolving funds is there one that
has been most notable for its success is there one
the moody natural history series i think has done
better than Well, it's done tremendously well.
And the centennial series established by the
Association of Former Students has also been a
tremendous series. That one,
we've done a wide variety of books in it. Of course,
it was begun to publish the centennial history of
the university and the pictorial history, and
also the Shewitz portfolio of prints. But since
then, we've also published a lot of other things
that that have nothing to do with the history of the
university, but are good Texas history or other
kinds of important subjects that need to be
published. So we've been able to use those funds to
cover the upfront costs of publishing and
production costs, get the books published. And
our selections have been consistently good in
that series over the years. So the fund has grown.
And you said that in leadership style, Frank was
more centralized and
Lloyd more decent. In hindsight, which worked
better for this press? Well, they both worked well
and at the right times. It was fine that... that
Frank was more centralized, more hands-on, more
do-it-himself. Because at that time, we were all
young and learning. And it was good to have someone
with that kind of experience guiding the
direction of the press. And then after some years,
after we had learned our jobs and Lloyd came in, he
was able to turn over a lot of the things to us
because we had the experience to handle them then.
And then he could go ahead and do the fundraising
and the kinds of acquisitions that he did. And he's
director about how long? He's director from 70, he
was about 10 years director of the press. Late 70s.
78 to 88. To 88. And during that time, the number of
titles per year increased? Oh, yes. We've made our
first big jump. in the early 80s, around 82, 83. And
we jumped from the 16, 18, 20 max titles a year that
we were publishing then up to about 26 or 28 a year.
And we did that over the space of about three
publishing seasons. So it was quite a
well-defined and drastic jump for us. Describe
what that jump meant for those of you on the staff.
Well, it meant a tremendous amount of work,
increase in the workload. We didn't increase the
staff that much immediately, although a couple of
years later we did hire another editor. And then
gradually the staff began to expand a little bit
from there. But it was... We had the manuscripts
coming in. We were over the hump of those early
years where we were struggling to find good books
to publish. And we were doing some things that
maybe we shouldn't have done simply because we
wanted to have the numbers of books. Such as? Well,
some of those books that I was talking about
earlier that were by faculty members that really
didn't fit any of the programs that we were
publishing in, but we needed the books and we felt
that it was a commitment to the university and the
faculty to publish those books. If we hadn't been
as
eager to fill out our list as we were then, we might
have had second thoughts about publishing those
or some of them. Right. Now, who made the decision
to increase the number of titles per year? Lloyd
did. And he felt that since we had the good
manuscripts coming in, that we ought to just go
ahead and take the bull by the horns and do them. He
went to, let's
see, I forget who the president was then. But I
think, actually, I think that was during the
period that the press was assigned to the
chancellor. It was actually a system press for a
few years in there. And I think Frank Hubert was the
chancellor. And Frank went to the board of
directors or regents, I forget which it was then,
and got recapitalization of the press. Frank
Wardlaw had originally obtained
capitalization, I think in the amount of $200,000
when the press was started. And Lloyd went back to
the board through Frank Hubert, and they got a
commitment from the board to recapitalize the
press and so that also was a major factor in
deciding to go ahead and expand the the size of the
list as far as you were aware when dr williams
became chancellor back in 77 did the press report
continue to report to him or did it stay on campus
report to jarvis miller They reported to Jarvis
Miller. All right, that's what I thought. And
how long was he president, two years? Until 1980.
Okay, so three years. Yeah. And I think it was about
1980 then that it was that- To Hubert. Hubert
decided to take charge of the press and it was
transferred to his oversight. And then it went
back to the, to the president I think when Frank
Vandiver became president. As far as you were
aware, Did the press at all suffer during either of
those changes, going to the system and then coming
back? In either case, was the press damaged? No. In
fact, I think it was to our advantage that Frank
Hubert took such a great interest in the press. And
he was the person who was most instrumental in
getting this building built for the press. I think
we would have languished in those trailers
another four years if it hadn't been for him. He
was very interested in what we were doing and felt
that we needed a place of our own to work and wanted
to see, was willing to put up the fight to see it
through. And I don't think Jarvis Miller would
have done that. You know, I'm making a note to
mention to Charles.
I wonder, has anybody done anything to say thank
you to Frank Hubert? You know, like, meaning on a
birthday or a Christmas? Yeah. Because? Well, no,
I don't know. We invited him to participate in the
25-year celebration last year, and because of
health reasons, he declined. See, he's
semi-mobile at best. Yeah, that's what I
understand. I haven't seen him in a long time. But
I've been told that he's not well. But we wanted to
honor him at that anniversary. And in fact, his
name was prominently mentioned in our
presentation.
that he was the person who was really responsible
for saving the press and getting us this building
during that time. Describe how you recall the
process of this building becoming a reality. It
took forever.
We also had an advocate in the university's
engineering department. And remind me the name of
the fellow who wanted to save the oak trees during
the MSC. Bob Rucker. Bob Rucker was our advocate in
engineering. And he had a hand in the planning of
the building and the design. He worked with Lloyd.
Lloyd consulted with all of us. The staff had a
voice in how we wanted the building laid out.
design plans were presented to us and this was the
one that we we picked we liked this one do you
remember who the architect was not really it's on
the plaque by the front door there who selected
this location as far as you're aware uh i don't know
i don't know i do know though that uh in the original
plans that the big gold mesquite tree in the back
was going to be cut down and the building was going
to corner of the building was going to be built over
that and i said to lloyd why not move the building up
eight feet six feet eight feet and leave that tree
let it let it live it had been there a long time it
didn't need to be cut down wasn't hurting anything
and so he he talked to bob rucker and rucker change
the plans. Was there good staff input into the
details of the building on the interior? Yes. Like
I say, Lloyd consulted with all of us on what we
thought we wanted in our offices and how we wanted
them arranged. The plans changed. Originally the
conference room, I believe, was going to be an
open-air atrium. And then of course that was moved
forward and is now the little atrium that is right
outside the front entrance between it and the
director's office. But that was originally going
to be much longer and run deeper into the building.
When did y'all begin to feel that the A&M Press was
achieving national status, a strong national
image.
We felt that we had always had national attention
among university presses because of Frank
Wardlaw's
influence and his reputation. When we began
developing a national
reputation, I think was probably with the
publication of Frank Vandiver's biography of
Pershing, and it was a runner-up in the National
Book Awards that year, and I think we began to
realize that Yeah, we're a real small press, and
we're down here in southeast Texas, but we can have
as much of an influence on publishing and on
national letters as any other publisher. And that
gave us a real boost. That was a tremendous,
gave us a lot of confidence. Did that help to
attract manuscripts, you think? I think so. I
think we began to get military history
manuscripts as a result of publishing that book.
And we really hadn't given much thought to
publishing military history until we did that
book. And then afterwards, things began to be
available that we could pick up and publish. Now,
there is no national ranking of university
presses, is there? Not an official one, no. That's
what I thought. So there's not a top ten or anything
like that? No, not really. Among public
university presses,
Charles and I have done some ranking and we've
calculated that we're probably down around 20. So
we're in the top 25, I think. Top 20 or 25. Among
publics. Publics, yes. Of course, we can't
compete with some of the private, Chicago, Yale,
Harvard. Now what is their secret to success?
Endowment. Over many, many years. And long
history. Yeah. Is there any one of those that the
average well-informed person would identify as
the top? Well, I don't know. Harvard University
Press or Chicago, either one I think.
It depends on whether they're readers in the
humanities or in the social sciences. Which of the
university presses has the biggest list of titles
per year? Which one?
among American university presses, not counting
Cambridge and Oxford, which of course are like
commercial publishers. California probably has
the largest list. Back to locally, Lloyd is here 10
years, and then he retires, and he's followed by
whom, Lloyd Lyman? Rick Stetter came in, I guess it
was 88. And he's here how long? Five years.
Describe his director style. Oh, Rick was very
California style, very laid back, laissez faire.
He
was a friend of everyone and just one of the most
personable people you'd ever want to meet. Yeah,
it was a very California style. That's about the
best way I can describe it. And then he leaves and
he's followed by? Well, Mary Miller was the
interim director for a year and a half. Okay. From
within. Yes. Assistant Vice President for
Finance and what's the administration, I guess.
And then she's followed by whom? Tom Rotell. And
Tom came from? University of Pennsylvania Press.
And he was here five years. And then Charles Backus
began last summer, about a year ago. Tom, what was
his style? Tom was a businessman, very
businesslike. And I've learned, I think I've
learned more from Tom than from anybody I'd worked
for before. I learned that it's not
a crime to think about the bottom line in
university press publishing. And in fact, it's
essential that you keep your eye on the bottom
line. And Tom was excellent at doing that. At the
same time, he was a wonderful publisher, too. He
had a really good feeling for books and what was
important and what
was wanted by both scholarly readers and trade
readers. And he really gave us all a feeling that we
were really accomplishing something. In terms of
the bottom line, which have been, as far as you're
aware and in press history, the most successful
and the least successful books? Bottom line, in
terms of sales. Sales compared to cost. Well, of
course, I think our best sellers have been the most
successful, Landscapes of Texas. Mm-hmm. and
Fishes of the Gulf of Mexico. Landscapes is a
beautiful photography book, color photography.
It was photographs from Texas Highways Magazine,
and we compiled several hundred pages of color
photography in one volume, and it's just been
tremendously popular for years.
I don't know now how many copies of it we've sold. I
have the sales report right there on the desk if you
want to look it up. Okay.
Okay, this is as of 1st of August. Landscapes of
Texas.
Lifetime sales $43,622. And you think that's the
best seller? That's our best seller. Fishes of the
Gulf of Mexico, I think, is the second. Let's see
what it is.
All I have here is the second edition of that. I
don't have the first edition, but I think it was up
around $35,000 when we I ended it and published the
second edition and the second edition is up around
4,500 copies now. So close to 40,000 total then. As
far as you and other members of staff would
normally calculate it, what would be the number of
copies to sell that becomes kind of a break-even
point? Oh, it varies so much from book to book. It's
hard to say. Can you give some examples? Well, if
you're talking about a very scholarly monograph
and you're only publishing at most 750 copies,
you'd have to sell at least 650 of them to break
even. And then, of course, the others would be
publicity copies, free copies for review and so
on. So you'd have to sell practically every one to
break even. If you're talking about a natural
history field guide and you're publishing 10,000
copies,
then probably your break even is going to be around
2,000 copies maybe. And what about an art book? An
art book depends on the price you put on it. If you
put a realistic price on it and really limit sales,
then you could probably break even within your
print run. If you lower the price down to the market
demand, then you're probably not going to break
even in a reasonable print run, and you need
subsidy. That's why the Moore Texas Art Series
Fund is so important. because that helps us get
over that hump and publish those books.